and the scientists we often go
to some of the most extreme
places on our planet to collect
microbes bring them back
understand what they're doing
and how they work
these types of organisms can
actually brought in our search
for life beyond Earth by knowing
what microbes are capable of we
can think about other places
where this could become a little
over a year ago I found myself
camping on the side of an active
volcano i was there is the chief
scientist of an expedition that
went to examine vanuatu's Martin
crater and it was unlike any
other camping experience I've
ever had right outside your tent
window there was constantly a
plume of toxic sulfur dioxide
you have to go with the
respirator whenever you went
outside there's also smart to
wear long sleeves there are tiny
microscopic basaltic needles
that would fall down upon you
and when the rain was water it
was acid had a pH of about two
despite all these hazards it
actually turns out that microbes
can survive in these places and
we were there to figure out why
we were there for this this is
the creator it's about a
kilometer across 500 meters deep
and at the very bottom of it in
this pit of roiling lava is the
world's most active lava lake we
needed to get samples from the
very bottom to understand how
microbes can survive so we
descended down the cliff when
it's close to the edge of the
lava lake as we dared all around
us lava was spewing sometimes
going over the top of our heads
raining down upon us
it wasn't a great place to be
for a very long time but we were
there just long enough to get
our critical samples
this is a place where the earth
is forming this is how rocks
come to be they are formed by
volcanoes and everywhere on the
surface of the planet microbes
inhabit these rocks we wanted to
see how this started
we collected samples that were
30 seconds old we saw them pop
up they were glowing red they
finally cooled off
we picked him up and we got a
full time series across days
weeks months years across the
island to figure out when
microbes colonize these rocks
what that means in terms of a
longer-term succession of
microbial community inside these
rocks and how that influences
elemental cycles
on our planet so volcanoes are
enormous planetary scale loud
very obvious features but they
actually create these tiny micro
niches that allow for distinct
forms of life to exist and as
the Geo biologist my interest is
in these interfaces it's kind of
where these planetary scale
processes meet on the microscale
places like this have been found
all over the world and microbes
typically find a way to survive
their organisms in the Rio Tinto
in southwestern Spain that can
breathe metal and create these
civic pools of blood red water
the minerals that are formed
here are actually found on Mars
as well recently off the coast
of Japan two and half kilometers
deep below the surface of the
ocean there are
methane-producing microbes this
is a whole different class of
organisms are the insurance
terrestrials living inside our
planet and the lower temperature
limit of life is still
completely unknown microbes can
survive inside ice down to
negative 20 degrees Celsius and
probably even cooler and combine
these forces really come
together to operate our planet
we're on microbial world let's
all just get used to it these
microbes create more than half
of the oxygen that we breathe
they mobilize the nutrients that
supports any sort of macroscopic
life and on my quest to
understand what the limits of
this biology is I typically
focus on the deep-sea we can
think of the earth as a battery
in the subsurface in those
liquids and those gases those
chemicals are said to be reduced
their a lot of electrons on the
very thin rind of the planet
that we operate in the
atmosphere
the surfaceworld the ocean that
said to be oxidized so where
these places meet this pole and
these these boundaries of
battery that's where energy can
be harvested so the deep sea is
our best opportunity to find new
types of metabolism and they're
sort of three canonical
categories over the last few
decades that have been carved
out within this deep-sea realm
black smoker hydrothermal vents
are precipitating these metal
sulfides several hundred degrees
Celsius the lost city
hydrothermal system forms from
water rock interactions no magma
needed and this creates an
alkaline system that leads to a
whole different type of of
microbes and methane seeps these
are places typically wear one
tectonic plate is subducted
beneath another one in the
organic
do that had kind of fallen down
on that first plate is being
broken down and streaming up
through the Earth's surface so
these methods sleep so I've done
most of my work you can see the
methane bubbles coming out not
as exciting as like smoke events
on TV perhaps but more important
because they're able to turn
that methane into Rock might be
the most important thermo
regulators on the planet
methane is a strict extremely
strong greenhouse gas so by
soaking it up into this rock we
can do a lot of good they're
kind of those three main flavors
of deep-sea chemosynthetic oasis
that i described but we're
already sensing that there are
other flavors as well recently
in the mid came in trough the
deepest and hottest hydrothermal
vent had ever been discovered
off the coast of Antarctica this
carpet of Yeti crabs was found
around hydrothermal vents these
crabs harvest bacteria on their
gills and eat those
it's the microbes though that
are making the food in the first
place from the chemist chemicals
and events
nonetheless most of the deep sea
looks like this to us we have no
idea what's going on
that's because less than 0.01
percent of the deep sea has ever
been seen by human eyes
this is the equivalent of Lewis
and Clark setting out on their
journey 1804 they leave their
fort on the banks of the
Missouri River they walk about a
half mile to their canoes but
instead of getting in those
canoes exploring the rest of the
continent seeing bison in
yellowstone and Catherine new
cultures seeing the Rockies
seeing a whole nother ocean they
spend the rest of their lives
walking about half mile and
studying that so why do we
really care about microbes what
does it mean to expand the realm
of metabolic possibility from a
very practical perspective we
can do a lot of good the project
I'm working on right now is
taking these deep-sea methane
eating metabolism and trying to
import it into e coli through
genetic means to turn methane
into a biofuel the drugs and bio
technologies of the future will
most likely come from the deep
sea or from the massive realm of
untapped genetic potential in
microbes around the world by
understanding the vast realm of
possibility of microbiology were
also expanding the realm of
potentially habitable worlds
beyond our planet so other
calculations that that our team
had worked on showed that the
method eating metabolism we see
in the deep sea would have
actually been energetically
possible on Mars in the ancient
past when there was water but to
me most fundamentally this
search is really getting to the
center of what life is all about
what is this crazy magical
process that moves electrons
around and ends up creating
these self-sustaining
self-replicating cells and
ultimately leads to civilization
and culture there's so much more
to get to and we're really just
starting this journey I can't
wait to see what we find
thank you
yeah